this video was made possible by
curiosity stream watch thousands of
high-quality documentaries and get
access to nebula using the link in the
description in 1950 to the first jet
airliner began carrying passengers
assuring in a new era but it was also
the same year this took to the skies an
enormous flying boat both of these
planes were trying to predict the future
of air travel and one company was
convinced that its flying boat would win
out in the end
because it would be a more comfortable
way to fly where passengers could relax
in a lounge dine in a restaurant even
sleep in their own private Suites flying
boats were already the Giants of the
skies and there seemed to be no limit to
how big and luxurious they could get the
world just needed to be convinced that
flying boats really did have a future
in the 1930s two distinct kinds of
airplanes had emerged land planes and
sea planes the obvious difference was
one landed on water and the other needed
a runway but in the 1930s that was an
important distinction because many
cities didn't even have a airports and
runways were often little more than dirt
or grass fields on the other hand the
world is covered in water
so flying boats could land just about
anywhere new york came a mighty german
Dornier flying boat on its first
transatlantic crossing another milestone
in the rapid advance of commercial
aviation while the development of land
planes was constrained by a lack of
suitable runways flying boats could grow
larger heavier and more capable and
because they could reach parts of the
world inaccessible to other planes
flying boats opened up air travel to
far-flung exotic destinations for the
lucky few who could afford it flying
boats became the preferred way to travel
earning a reputation for comfort and
even safety because over the middle of
the ocean the ability to land in case
something went wrong was a reason why
many thought flying boats were superior
and it helped calm the nerves of uneasy
passengers the rapid development of
flying boats led many to believe that
they were the future of long-range air
travel and in 1943 one a conic British
aircraft builder began designing the
next generation of flying boats an
enormous plane that would redefine air
travel but the plan would have to wait
1943 was the middle of the Second World
War
new airliners weren't a priority but
after the war air travel would certainly
boom again and saunders-roe was going to
be ready with an all-new flying boat
that would put them at the forefront
[Music]
and this is what they came up with the
largest most advanced flying boat
airliner
ever built they called it the princess
feeding name for an airliner with a
luxurious two-level cabin featuring
lounges an actual restaurant sleeper
cabins even a promenade for its 100
lucky passengers that the princess was
an odd-looking bird but its unique shape
helped reduce drag also aiding with
efficiency was a new innovation
turboprop engines some of the first ever
on an airliner and this plane was packed
with them eight turboprops driving
contra-rotating propellers through a
gearbox and another - powering single
propellers it was a complex design but
it meant the princess could reach speeds
of over 600 kilometres an hour
climbed at 39,000 feet and travel over
9,000 kilometers practically doubling
the performance of earlier flying boats
with the princess saunders-roe brought
flying boats into a new era just in time
for the 1950's boom in air travel and
the company was already designing the
next generation to follow the princess a
sleek flying boat with swept wings and
turbo jets and for saunders-roe
it was flying boats all the way down
they were even developing the world's
first flying boat fighter jet but while
the company seemed confident in the
future of flying boats the rest of the
world wasn't
in 1952 the princess took its maiden
flight an enormous plane was a main
attraction at the Farnborough airshow
but airlines weren't interested because
a lot had changed during the Second
World War for starters the war hadn't
been fought with flying boats but
enormous land-based bombers proving the
long-range capability of land planes and
over the course of the war thousands of
new airports were constructed around the
world with long concrete runways after
the war many of these new airports in
the military aircraft using them were
converted to civilian use
by 1950 all of the world's major
airlines had abandoned their flying
boats switching to land-based airliners
it was simply a matter of economics to
land on water flying boats needed
stronger bulkier fuselages so they were
naturally heavier less aerodynamic and
difficult to pressurize and flying boats
were more challenging to fly requiring
additional training for pilots in the
planes exposure to corrosive salt water
meant more maintenance all factors which
made flying boats less profitable for
Airlines still Sanders Roe remained
committed to flying boats convinced
their advantage in size safety and their
ability to operate on natural stretches
of water without much infrastructure
would soon spark their resurgence all
they had to do was convince everyone
else so the company went on an all-out
marketing offensive asserting that
flying boats could still match the
performance of land planes and boasting
that the princess would mark the
beginning of a resurgence in flying boat
air travel but desperation also seemed
to be creeping in as the company tried
to argue that the switch to land-based
aircraft had been driven by false
assumptions outdated figures or even
plain prejudice against flying boats but
the marketing seemed to fall on deaf
ears even BOAC Britain's leading airline
had no interest in the princess instead
they made a bet on the world's first
jet-powered airliner ordering a fleet of
de Havilland
Komets and by 1954 it was clear that all
the marketing in the world wasn't going
to bring back in era of flying boats the
gusano's row hadn't sold a single plane
after two years without a buyer the
company was forced to put the princess
and two half-finished
airframes into long-term storage the age
of the flying boat was over but not
before saunders-roe engineers got the
chance to dream up the ultimate flying
boat
flying boats couldn't compete with
modern airliners but maybe they didn't
have to because in 1956 saunders-roe
engineers came up with this a design for
a truly colossal 1,000 passenger flying
boat aimed squarely at ocean liners
which in the 1950s were still carrying
passengers throughout the world over a
dozen were in service between Britain
and Australia alone and one shipping
company was looking for a better way to
move a huge amount of people it was an
idea every bit as crazy as it sounds
a flying ocean liner the length of a
football field with five decks in a crew
of 47 just to get this million and a
half pound flying boat airborne
saunders-roe envisioned 24 jet engines
integrated into the enormous wings this
plane would have been so big there'd be
enough room inside the wings for
engineers to walk around even service
all those jets in mid-flight
of course this enormous flying boat
never made it off the drawing board even
more outrageous than its design would
have been the cost to get it built and
it would be the last flying boat for
saunders-roe by the 1960s they shifted
to other emerging fields and soon
saunders-roe disappeared altogether
merging with another British aircraft
builder meanwhile the princess flying
boats sat in storage for over a decade
proposals to convert them into cargo
planes troop transports even an
experimental nuclear-powered aircraft
never panned out and by 1967 all three
airframes had corroded and the enormous
planes were broken up and sold for scrap
it was the largest and most advanced
flying boat airliner ever built the
strangely futuristic but also archaic at
the same time plane designed for a
future that never existed
choosing my next topic isn't as easy as
it sounds
I have to consider whether it'll do well
with YouTube's recommendation algorithm
that decides which videos to promote to
viewers I also have to worry about
whether my videos will get demonetised
that means most military topics are just
too risky
YouTube decides which videos you watch
and it also influences which ones I
create it's time to do something about
it
by now you've heard that just $2.99 a
month gets you access to thousands of
big-budget documentaries on curiosity
stream and to nebula where independent
channels like mustard are free to create
the content we want to create in a few
weeks I'll be releasing my first Nebula
original a video about a secret Japanese
World War two machine that almost
changed the course of the war nebula is
home to a growing number of originals
and it's where you can support mustard
and content from your favorite
educational creators free from ads or
sponsor messages if you're looking for a
deeper dive into fascinating topics
curiosity stream is where you'll find
thousands of high-quality documentaries
from history and nature to engineering
and design get a free month of both
curiosity stream and nebula when you go
to curiosity stream comm slash mustard
and use the promo code mustard when you
sign up
[Music]